[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>If we were left entirely
to our own devices,
the natural maturation
process provides us
with exactly the
right opportunities
for expansion and ascendancy.
Let's take a look at that.
Life can be thought of as
divided into seven-year cycles,
seven-year windows in which
we are given carefully crafted
phases of time to cultivate
our understanding of self
and universe, not
specifics, not necessarily
any particular images and
details and vocations,
but themes, energies,
broad themes.
The particular details are
usually quite arbitrary.
The methods and principles
are what really matter.
So in the course of a
natural spiritual human life,
we have these seven-year cycles.
Whether we
acknowledge it or not,
local, planetary, solar,
and universal influences
are constantly
shaping and energizing
these phases of growth.
Energizing is the key word.
This is one good way
to interpret them.
Allow me to share this with you.
From zero years of age
to seven years of age,
really the first
seven years of life
are the most delightful
and cherished.
At this point, we're in a
state of purity, perfectly
free from also soul
work for many years.
How lovely.
Soul does not even come
in for a good while.
We play.
We explore.
We acclimate to our new
surroundings and family,
and if we have
chosen it to be, we
begin the processes of
strengthening ourselves
for the coming trials
and challenges.
It is ironic that in
this state of purity,
we find the seeds of our
deepest courage for later.
And yet when we are in
those first seven years,
the clear bliss
and unbounded joy
are really one of the
loveliest parts of life.
Seven to 14, that
next cycle-- this
is the period when
self develops.
Self begins to shape itself
and manifest all our own unique
characteristics.
There are many
constituents to this.
Somehow our self arises from
our blood lineage, our tribe,
our heart, our bones.
Some of the self is
our own invention,
portrayed, not defined by, the
artistry of our personality.
And when there is the other
more esoteric of self,
then we really start
to appreciate there
is a transtemporal element.
That is our inner
core being transcends
the lifetime of
this one individual
and is more properly considered
an emanation from soul,
embodying many aspects
from prior lives.
Things we need to work
on present themselves.
Strengths-- we have spent
many eons refining contours,
theaters of conflict
that we have previously
run away from begin once more to
establish themselves and demand
our attention.
14 to 21-- outward observation.
Here, we begin to seriously
examine the world around us--
what it is, what it's
for, how it influences
us, and necessarily high up on
the subject of our observations
is the behavior of our
fellow human beings.
Teenagers know how
crap most people
are, what rubbish the
grownups have settled for.
For the young observer, many
competing energies powerfully
interweave for the first
time-- intellect, sensitivity,
sensuality, creativity, love,
higher aspirations, and also
the negative mappings of
depression and anxiety,
separation and loss.
In ancient times,
the wise elders
would provide wise
and loving guidance
through this very key
developmental phase and gift
them, these young people,
with sacred knowledge
that brought balance and truth
and healing and fortitude.
21 to 28-- inward observation.
This is where the journey
of spiritual development
really begins to
gain some traction.
This is the age where the inner
refinement is really tested.
Contemporary society
has no place for young,
spiritually evolving
men and women.
We see examples, of course,
of lip service and pretense,
but true inward observation
is actually discouraged.
You see, for society which
seeks to control its subjects,
inward observation
in a human being
is a disaster, because it leads
to a very revolutionary kind
of freedom, outward reformation.
This leads to the
next phase, 28 to 35.
This outward
reformation-- what is it?
This is the stage where
we would ordinarily
begin to shape our outward
life to fit our inward journey.
We reconcile the necessary
adventures inside and out.
We travel.
We make sanctuary.
We engage with the
most significant parts
of life, periods of
exhilarating mobility
and pioneering
natural anthropology
as we walk through the world
and adapt our behaviors
to what we see around
us-- the people,
the things, the customs.
Periods of sanctuary,
where we take our rest
and contemplation.
We grasp the dynamite power
of silence and stillness.
We affiliate ourselves with
other spiritual tribesmen
who are doing the same as us
with honor, determination,
and skill.
And there are
periods of engagement
where we throw ourselves
into the hubbub,
into projects and work,
study and art, craftsmanship,
into discovery and refinement,
people, communities,
building, setting down
new foundations for better
ways of living and growing.
35 to 42 brings us to
inward reformation.
Here, in this seven-year
period, we change the inside.
We work to resolve
the old circuits that
no longer serve us.
We design new modes of
perception and response,
new formulas of
interaction and engagement,
and bring an overall
equilibrium to the inner life
that is absolutely
essential to the furtherance
of the individual.
In a very keen way,
this is the time
when the giant monolith of self
is sculpted and refined down
to a much simpler
and more subtle form.
The giant cracks, and
globular protuberances
are done away with.
The hard angles are smoother.
The beauty is cultivated
as best we can.
We begin to value
grace in our being.
We see that treading
lightly is the key
to the mastery of inner power.
We finally internalize
the knowing
that having a big
improperly positioned ego
blocks access to high wisdom.
The universe doesn't
share with blabber mouths
and chest beaters, however
clever or driven they are.
We learn humility.
We cross the threshold
of self control.
42 to 49-- outward being.
This is where we begin to knock
the outside world into shape.
With the accumulation of all
the prior wisdom and experiences
we have behind us,
we can now begin
to specify how it is
that we wish to live,
how we wish to be.
What are the components
of that life?
Who is in it?
Who is not in it?
What do we do?
How are we known?
What do we not do?
How do we know other people
and beings and experiences?
What occasion do we provide
for ourselves to be?
Because sometimes
that is necessary.
Typically, at this
time in life, we
have the first real
visceral gratitude
for peace and balance.
How we conduct ourselves, how
we move and speak and love
become incredibly important.
Inward being, 49 to
56 years of age--
this is where the power comes.
You will notice the pattern
through these stages
outward, inward, outward,
inward, outward, inward.
It is always during the inward
expression of a growth phase
that the real substance
and teaching of our wisdom
can be most
effectively integrated.
It is the integration that
brings adeptness and power.
It is a good thing if these
years are calm and deep, slow,
and joyful.
Not a time to be running
around being massively busy.
These things do not
represent success
for the spiritual man,
the spiritual woman.
It is a most
valuable skill to be
able to design a life,
which is being set up
through that reformational
period, 28 to 42,
that accommodates
our choice to change
the velocity of our inquiry.
Slowness brings
quality through depth.
Speed brings quantity
through distance.
56 to 63, outward
ascendancy-- this stage
represents the bearing of
fruit from all our hard work
and labor, all those years, the
transformational phase where
the old clockwork
of the human being
is for the first
time transcended.
We become master of ourselves.
Self is ours to use as a
beautiful instrument for growth
and creation and exploration.
We truly govern ourselves
with wisdom and grace.
63 to 70-- finally,
inward ascendancy.
The culmination of all our work
prepares the vessel for exit.
Whether the individual decides
to stay for another 20 or 40
or 500 years is up
to them, but this
is the period of the deepest joy
in life, an illuminated return
to the purity of that first
cycle so long ago in our lives
when we were two,
five years old.
We refine and craft and be.
The threshold has been
crossed, and the work is done.
Harvest is in.
Now it is time to
celebrate and make
joyful preparations for the next
journey, to see our loved ones,
to rally with our
tribal ancestors
we have not seen
for generations,
to rest in the heavenly
realms, to regenerate,
to ascend homewards for a time.
Consider these seven-year
cycle carefully.
Look at the big
crossroads in your life,
and you will see that they most
frequently occur at the endings
and beginnings of these cycles.
Are these not natural stages of
initiation that life gifts us
with?
If only we can collect
ourselves, take a moment,
and be still enough to recognize
them, then they have value.
Do join me next time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]